so I'm just gonna jump into this
presentation by going through a couple
of my past projects so this is a project
I did in 2014 called Crown Heights Mike
it's a collaboratively built pirate
radio station based in Crown Heights
Brooklyn the transmitter runs on an FM
dial and has about a half a mile radius
so local residents and business owners
could sign up for a time slot and I'd
pass off this little radio setup from DJ
- DJ and the only rule was that you had
to do your show in Crown Heights and so
what I love about this project is the FM
transmitter is really just a tool and
the project really gets shaped by who
parts who participates and so this is
faheen he's a general store owner in the
neighborhood and he got so into the
project he would advertise his DJ sets
in front of his store my love for radio
grew into me working with Houston based
Houston Texas based artists collective
Oh Topanga Jones & Associates on a
project called Oh JB k FM so I outfitted
this beautiful 1959 Kahn candy pink
Cadillac with a web radio server and we
hosted shows in bed-stuy Brooklyn and
Third Ward Houston our shows ranged from
hyperlocal black history lessons to DJ
sets and live performances we collected
and documented the kind of regional
regional and localized black history
lessons you can't find in textbooks and
it made Public Radio truly public this
is another project called level up it's
a game that teaches you how to do the
real Harlem shake so in the summer of
2012 DJ Bower came out with a song
called Harlem shake which prompted
people to make viral videos like these
and while they might look fun videos of
the real Harlem shake sort of got lost
on the Internet you'd have to go pages
and pages into a youtube search before
you could see the original dance through
a residency at the new Museum I worked
with a curator Ally Rosa Salas and light
feet nation founder crybaby cozy and a
whole crew of light feed dancers to make
this game and light feed dancers if
you've been to New York there the
dancers you see on the subway or some of
them are part of this crew and there are
sort of the last keepers of this dance
so we mapped the dancers shoulders
movements and used
as the data for the game so this is an
install shot of the game at trial
Amsterdam you push this big red button
on the left which is super inviting and
it launches you into a minute-long
instructional round with crybaby cosy
where he teaches you the fundamentals of
the Harlem shake
and then you move into a battle round
against one of the dancers and I can
tell you right now no one won this game
and so before I do a deeper dive on a
longer ongoing project I want I want to
just say that my research interests
converge at this question of how
cultural and art and artifacts are
recorded preserved and celebrated so a
little bit before I talk about Iago
repository we should talk a little bit
about the history of sharing African
diasporic art and culture before
institutions collected and shared
objects they were exhibiting people
this is Oda Benga a Congolese man who
was seized by slave traders in the early
1900s to be exhibited in the st. Louis
world fair and then was later sold to
explorer explorer Samuel Phillips Verner
speaks it exhibited them Bronx zoos
monkey house or even earlier there was
sergeev Artman one of two South African
women who were exhibited as a freakshow
attractions across the Europe under the
name Hottentot Venus and even when we
talk about African diasporic objects are
artifacts many of our museums have
robust collections but again the credit
line is usually not how the object was
acquired which points to a story of
seizure and when we zoom out even
farther to how contemporary culture is
represented and shared a similar
narrative of seizure and and erasure
exists Katy Perry so all of these
constitute serious issues of black
artistic and cultural representation as
a way to address these issues another
artist ioad amalah ogun Sundy and I came
together to start the Iago repository
during an i-beam residency so yah per
repository is a resource library that
exists in a nondescript future and
houses a collection of art and artifacts
made by and for people of African
descent we now have two additional
members Marianna giallo and
Malu Kumar so everyone always ask where
does the name come from
Lillith Iago is a character and Octavia
Butler is I know Genesis trilogy she's
the last human being that resembles
people of our kind human beings of our
kind
so the repository has four main
divisions which all require a level of
participation to create so I'll talk
about the workshop structure so we ask
participants to become archivists of the
Opera repository and they invent future
artifacts using this card game so if you
were to get this set of cards you'd have
to come up with a revolutionary
political tool that somehow incorporates
changing color and then you draw it on
this very very official document that
then gets encased in acrylic and gets
filed away in our manuscript division
and so we've hosted public workshops on
the street in our neighborhood and when
we do this iö dresses up as an afro not
so we can barter selfies for artifact
ideas and we've partnered with community
driven organizations universities and
museums to host us it's important to me
to make unlikely partnerships and doing
this work to be able to leverage
resources and share knowledge between
spaces so a lot of the images you're
seeing right now are from a partnership
between via Carnegie Mellon and August
Wilson Center our legacy black
organization in Pittsburgh so through
the August Wilson Center lab we tweaked
our workshop curriculum we've added
three tracks that makes time for
exposure and hands-on exploration with
two new technologies that way
participants are more involved in the
making process so we have one workshop
track that asks participants to rapid
prototype their artifact designs using
basic electronic components things like
microcontrollers LEDs buzzers servo
motors we have a VR engineering truck
that asked participants to sketch their
future future artifact in 3d space this
is most of our participants first time
in VR so it's really an opportunity to
go wild and get comfortable with a new
tool and a third track it's digital
fabrication where we show participants
how to laser cut or 3d print some
component of their future artifact so
just share a couple examples this is a
bodysuit that gives you the calming
sensation of being underwater
this is a therapeutic tool for treating
people with water related traumas and
the participant was thinking about the
transatlantic slave trade as being a
root trauma for some black Americans so
this is the the suit fully fabricated so
we take the sketches and then build them
out so they're fully functioning and
then we make videos of the suits in
action so you can see them in context
working so there are tubes that pump
water around arms and legs there each
one of the joints there are these black
cups that have vibrator motors that are
synced to tidal patterns of the Atlantic
Ocean so you get a nice sort of
undulating vibration along your body
okay first time I'm gonna keep going so
these are affirmation pills a prescribed
or even vitamin like supplement that
when taken gives you specialized black
history lessons so here we have civil
rights we have transatlantic slave trade
and rock-and-roll yeah this artifact
always makes me laugh because you know
when we have it up in exhibitions I
always catch someone taking one and I'm
like cool it's as if they've fallen so
deep into the narrative they're like
this might work
so but the person who designed this was
thinking you know people bring in
whatever they're thinking about that day
and I think the person who made this was
thinking about microaggressions and was
like I just you know wouldn't it be
great if you could just give someone a
pill and they they get it you know they
just really get it
so here's one last artifact example so
you know when you placed the seashell up
to your hear you can hear the ocean this
participant played with the idea and
developed mother radio a music streaming
channel that plays music and sounds by
women and Femmes across the Diaspora so
here's the artifact
you'll hear everything from a snack
cuckoo playing the could add tobacco
women and camryn water drumming to
interviews with Sylvia Rivera and Marsha
P Johnson I can control the feed from my
remotely so I'm just like DJing whenever
it's being exhibited and here's a still
from the film that goes along with the
artifact and the last division of the
repository is there where a media
division so on the left you'll see an
early prototype it's um this was a dead
drop library where visitors could insert
a USB stick into the slot and a dead
drop will dump a folder of mp3s PDFs
images and video files that influence
the project we worked with the black
unicorn library and Carnegie Library in
Pittsburgh to update update the design
and the content of the of the piece so
that's what you see on the right
installed in the library so when we
exhibit the project you almost have this
play house experience where you can dig
through the manuscripts watch the film
see the artifacts sift through our
resources and contribute more artifact
ideas yourself so an alongside my
personal projects I do
quickly wanted to talk about a space
where a lot of this learning that I've
been doing is put into practice
so my friends Angelina dream and
Annabelle Luque founded power plant
almost six years ago then it was a pop
up digital art and tech school that
floated from stream gallery in Brooklyn
to Red Bull studios and then Hunter
College I came in about four years ago
when we wanted to start a
brick-and-mortar space what we call a
digital art collaboratory a space where
folks can have unstructured time to use
our resources and also sign up for
classes we found this bright orange
beauty salon with Rihanna on the awning
and began the work of renovating and
here we are power plant and artists
built interest-driven school and lab all
the classes are pitched and taught by
artists and all the classes are selected
by are selected by what we hear our
neighbors say they need and for anyone
wondering we've kept Rihanna from the
awnings and we've like hung her up
nicely in our bathroom so she's still
with us and here's a space inside so our
classes range from intro to 3d modeling
to how to design a logo logo to camera
basics our most popular classes are the
intros to Ableton or C DJ's that are
taught by local DJs and music producers
we also offer a suite of practical arts
training that's become that's become
popular so classes like legal basics for
artists and how to pitch a project we
also have a monthly resident residency
program where artists working with
digital tools take over the space to
host events exhibitions panels some
examples and we partner often with
cultural and academic institutions in
New York so here's a collaboration we
did with teens and persons from the
Parsons Scholars Program at the new
school in just three weeks they planned
an event series that featured an
exhibition a panel creative entrepreneur
sure worked entrepreneur workshops a rap
show poetry nights and so much more and
they did it in three weeks that's
amazing and here's a pop-up program we
did with pioneer works in Brooklyn
called Ableton Live Live
we synched all the computers and routed
and routed them through the same mixer
so all the workshop participants could
collectively build on one beat so it's
essentially an electronic drum circle
and just to close I wanted to give a
sense of a typical day day at power
plant most of the young people who come
in don't aspire to be a graphic designer
or artist or filmmaker a fashion
designer because they already identify
as such when I was their age I would you
know say when I grow up I want to be
where as they come and they say hi my
name is Salome a and I'm an artist I
need you to help me with my website so
this is our neighbor mega gamester he
uses our space to build out his game
review channel on YouTube for a while he
was recording editing and uploading all
who shows up power plant and so one day
he noticed that we had this painting
show up by by Pat Shue and wanted to do
a special episode mixing his interests
with the paintings on display so I'm
gonna play a clip and I just wanna say
our criticism like never looked so good
well I won't talk about is easy this one
it dad this one they're mostly just made
of multiple pictures and stuff just
smash together and it may look like a
whole bunch of lies but to me I think of
undertale this is definitely a sand
that's what mega felt flour right there
it's probably as real no over there is
just fresh just me no longer just just
imagine the sands and Omega flour just
fighting right here
[Music]
so that goes on for like seven more
minutes where he's placed he's like
embedded all his favorite videogame
characters in Pat's paintings so I'll
close there thank you
[Applause]